[Back to Home Page](https://grace-yoon1.github.io/DATA150/)

Grace Yoon

COLL 150 Human Development and Data Science

3 October 2021

Word count: 1,814

---

### Annotated Bibliography: Poverty Assessment and Analysis in India

---

#### [Article 1](https://towardsdatascience.com/how-data-science-can-give-further-understanding-on-urban-poverty-ab52e448913)

Fashridjal, Freddy. “How Data Science Can Give Further Understanding on Urban Poverty.” Towards Data Science, 13AD, https​://towardsdatascience.com/how-data-science-can-give-further-understanding-on-urban-poverty-ab52e448913. 

Data science allows us to make predictions and get insights on significant harms of development problems, like poverty. The same technology that real-time analytics companies use to understand consumer behavior can also be used to understand complex human development problems such as individuals in need with urban poverty. There are two types of poverty: absolute poverty is being deprived of basic needs and capabilities, while relative poverty is the inability to attain a decent standard of living. In developing countries, like India, poverty is in areas with larger populations that lack enough resources to gain financial security. While organizations, institutions, and governments have attempted to diminish poverty, most have been unsuccessful in these underdeveloped areas. However, data science can be used to seek insights and predictions that are best for understanding the needs of the poor. 

The article, “How Data Science Can Give Further Understanding on Urban Poverty,” discusses three phases of analysis to understand these needs from data. The first phase of analysis: how data science can be utilized to formulate datasets on development problems in countries and match with already existing datasets from the geographic information system (GIS), to grasp a deeper understanding of utility in these areas. Then, in the second phase, community leaders can be contacted to delve deeper into these areas and attain specific data from those residents. The data points could be used to analyze current living conditions, education, employment, etc. to predict the stability of employment for young residents in these areas. In the third phase of analysis, experimentation and data can be used to gain information on how to fulfill the needs of the population. From experimenting on two similar areas, such as offering one area upgrades to their current settlement compared to the other relocating to a new neighborhood. From this example, collecting data in the two areas, both could be assessed to see which case would fulfill the needs of those in poverty better. The data in experiments could also be used for future initiatives in developing problems to predict their outputs. Overall, insights on areas living in poverty can be attained from data science in order to apply the right alleviation strategies that are needed.

This article relates to Amartya Sen’s definition of human development because both discuss using phases of analysis in data to enhance our understanding of freedoms and unfreedoms a population has. By the author’s research, strategies to find the best way to alleviate poverty are being addressed. Freddy Fashridjal explains how analysis and experimentation can lead us closer to sustainable development goals for the lives of these undeveloped areas. Fashridjal uses datasets from GIS and gathers closely related data to investigate the best strategies in the different experiments to understand areas deeply in data exploration.

---

#### [Article 2](https://www.worldpop.org/portfolio/project?id=22)

Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, World Bank, Grameen Foundation. “High Resolution Progress out of Poverty Mapping.” WorldPop, https​://www​.worldpop.org/portfolio/project?id=22. Accessed 30 Sept. 2021. 

Poverty is a significant harm to countries all over the world. It causes humans to face challenges like poor health and untenable living conditions. To reduce the amount of poverty in the world, institutions have tried numerous approaches, however, the issue is not knowing exactly where in these countries that individuals suffer from poverty the most. Without knowing these areas of poverty, development in these countries is slowed down, not allowing them to attain the freedoms to allow them to thrive. To find specific areas of poverty, poverty mapping can be used to spatially target and estimate poverty in these underdeveloped countries. To access poverty, the Progress out of Poverty Index (PPI) can be used to create poverty maps of the chance of individuals living in poverty for large geographic areas, such as those in India. Finding ways to quantify and predict poverty is complex in large areas of population, like India. Therefore, PPI uses geolocated survey data and geospatial datasets to predict spatial poverty, which can be used to better understand where these areas are in order to further develop them. 

This article, “High Resolution Progress out of Poverty Mapping,” relates to what Amartya Sen has mentioned about human development in his book, “Development as Freedom.” Amartya Sen’s definition of human development discusses how analyzing and assessing poverty can enhance the lives we lead and the freedoms we enjoy. Knowing where areas, like those in India, are not as developed can allow us to use freedoms to further develop and remove the unfreedom of low income. From the unfreedom of low income, the people in poverty in India may be illiterate, have bad health, suffer from hunger, etc., which is why they are deprived of basic capabilities. The authors, from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, address human development dimensions of the standard of living, discussing ways to access areas in the world of poor health, hunger, etc. from poverty. In relation to this article on poverty mapping, I believe tools like the PPI can be used to reach the sustainable goal of locating areas in need, providing them freedoms in order to develop as a whole. The authors investigated population numbers below the PPI poverty line and uncertainty range inset. They predicted the PPI index in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar in India, with an uncertainty map inset as well. From the article, the authors are seeking to answer an efficient way to solve main health and welfare challenges and to know where poverty is greatest. 

---

#### [Article 3](https://www.worldpop.org/portfolio/project?id=23)

Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. “High Resolution Poverty Mapping from Cell Phone and Satellite Data.” WorldPop, https​://www​.worldpop.org/portfolio/project?id=23. Accessed 2 Oct. 2021. 

To end poverty, it is necessary to gain knowledge and information about areas suffering from poverty. Data is essential to understanding their situations to make the best informed decision in “resource allocation, poverty alleviation programs, and policies.” Geospatial datasets and patterns of poverty have been built from census data, however, those datasets have been inaccurate due to irregular or unavailable data in these low-income areas. Therefore, data collected from mobile phone operators allows accurate and updated high-resolution maps to be produced. With these high-resolution maps, poverty in these areas can be accessed closely and efficiently. From satellite imagery and mobile operators, human living conditions and behavior can be observed in these populations, like India and other South Asia countries. For example, the article, “High Resolution Poverty Mapping from Cell Phone and Satellite Data,” provides a figure of a prediction map in Bangladesh using mobile phone operators and other data to closely access areas in poverty. The wealth index is color-coded, having areas in red shown as poorer areas. The figure has a closer view of the capital of Bangladesh, Dhaka. From these models, the spatial relationships in the data of these areas can be used to understand and update these maps, which is important for analyzing poorer areas to alleviate poverty. 

This article relates to Amartya Sen’s definition of human development because it discusses using data science to alleviate poverty, which is an unfreedom that Amartya Sen mentions. Development is the process of expanding human freedoms and by obtaining information about these poorer areas, actions and policies can be made to allow these countries to reach this developmental freedom. The process of development, when judged by the enhancement of human freedom, has to include the removal of an individual’s deprivation such as poverty. Living a long and healthy life by having access to knowledge and a decent standard of living is what allows a country to flourish and alleviate poverty. The authors of this article discuss how these data science methods can be useful to analyzing poverty closely in countries and areas like India and Bangladesh.

---

#### [Article 4](https://towardsdatascience.com/how-to-understand-global-poverty-from-outer-space-442e2a5c3666)

Kumar, Asmi. “How to Understand Global Poverty from Outer Space.” Towards Data Science, 5 July 2020, https​://towardsdatascience.com/how-to-understand-global-poverty-from-outer-space-442e2a5c3666. 

To predict and understand poverty, geospatial datasets and data science methods are used from satellite imagery and neural networks. Identifying these impoverished areas is difficult which causes these populations to lack “money, food, medicine, and access to education.” There are many resources being produced for billions of people, yet due to the difficulty of understanding and identifying these countries, many still suffer in poverty. To alleviate poverty, data science strategies like creating computer vision models allow us to provide resources and predict poverty in countries. The article discusses five key steps to approaching global poverty. The author discusses a method to predict poverty using a convolutional neural network and uses daytime and nighttime satellite images to analyze certain areas in order to improve policies, initiatives, etc. to alleviate poverty. The first step is to download Demographic and Health Surveys, nightlight satellite imagery, and daytime satellite imagery. The article discusses downloading data and constructing clusters to gain a better understanding and measurement for “health, population, and nutrition.” They used the Google Maps Platform to obtain daytime images that have features of landscape and activity. Then, the next step is to test whether nightlights can predict wealth accurately. From the data collected, the DHS and nightlights data is merged to see if nightlights data can be used for predicting poverty. The author explains how this visualization shows that nightlight luminosity is great for this, having brighter cool-colored clusters represent wealth in these areas. After, whether basic features of daytime imagery can also predict wealth accurately, and extract image features are tested. Daytime imagery can be a valuable tool as well and when merged with the DHS data, “a model of wealth as a function of these basic daytime features is fitted.” Next, a convolutional neural network is constructed to leverage a combined dataset of daytime and nighttime images. A transfer learning approach using a convolutional neural network estimates nightlight intensities, repurposes the model, and obtains final feature vectors. Lastly, maps are constructed to show the predicted distributions of wealth. In conclusion, an approach to predict poverty in areas is to use convolutional neural networks with daytime and nighttime satellite imagery with survey data. Analyzing the data from this is scalable and inexpensive, hence why the author plans to expand this for more countries. 

This article relates to Amartya Sen’s definition of human development the author discusses how using data science can lead a population towards freedom. From using convolutional neural networks and satellite imagery, more information can be obtained to understand those suffering from the unfreedom of poverty. Society believes that if you lack wealth, you live a miserable and unfreedom life, and this limits development and growth. Everyone admires wealth because they believe it leads them to more freedom and associates it as the only way to be successful. The goal is to remove these individuals deprived of basic capabilities and from poverty to expand their real freedoms to live more freely.

---

I believe that India will be interesting for further investigation regarding poverty assessment and analysis. From poverty, there is a lack of resources like education, sanitation, housing, and nutrition. Those who suffer from poverty are deprived of their basic capabilities and don’t have opportunities or human freedoms. In undeveloped countries like India, the people suffer complex challenges such as no access to health care, safe drinking water, and adequate food. Millions of people in India live on less than $1.90 per day with an unreliable income source, which is not enough to experience human freedoms from development and growth.
