[Back to Home Page](https://grace-yoon1.github.io/DATA150/)

### [Don't forget people in the use of big data for development](https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-018-06215-5)

In Joshua Blumenstock's article, "Don't forget people in the use of big data for development," he claims that information and data from technology and other sources is not a solution for international development issues in the world, rather humbler data science could transform them. Blumenstock explains the promise of utilizing these large data sets to solve these problems. However, Blumenstock discusses the pitfalls of using data to transform international development. With these concerns, he still has hope for the future of data science and proposes several improvements for the ways forward in humbler data science. I believe "good intent," "transparency," and "balancing act" are essential when considering the intersection of human development and data science.

Blumenstock supports his thesis by providing information on studies involving international development. Many developing countries have changed consumer lending through data from phone calls and Facebook friends. Machine-learning algorithms can be used to collect this data to be interpreted for issues such as consumer lending. Blumenstock mentions that just like how Google uses the same algorithms to match advertisements, it can be used to identify people living in poverty to provide necessary resources for them. He claims that networks and satellite imagery could allow humanitarian aid to be distributed more efficiently. Sadly, attempts at reducing poverty have benefited the wealthy more than the poor because of the lack of these methods. Therefore, Blumenstock emphasizes the importance of using data science to improve international development issues like poverty.

Unfortunately, using such tools comes with pitfalls of unanticipated effects, lack of validation, biased algorithms, and lack of regulation. With unanticipated effects, using data can strengthen and favor those who are secure rather than vulnerable people. For example, digital credit and loans can lead to debt traps because most take risks as first-time borrowers. Technology can be harmful and can't benefit citizens in these situations. Blumenstock states that lack of validation can be limiting and conventional data-collection methods have flaws. Algorithms don't remain accurate as time passes, and degrades quickly in real-time data applications. There are many variables and factors between the data and international development issues, which is why these tools can be pitfalls. Another issue is that some data marginalize people and cause biased algorithms. There are prerequisites such as electricity, literacy, etc. that make these developing countries underrepresented. Lastly, private companies prioritize maximizing profits rather than having "good intent". In wealthier countries, legislation limits the abuse of power and prevents issues of data privacy, transparency, etc. However, developing countries lack regulation and checks and balances, causing these pitfalls of data.

Despite the many pitfalls, Blumenstock addresses them through the four steps of validation, customization, and collaboration. He stresses the importance of using data to complement and not to replace old data. Customizing algorithms for specific purposes for the data to be incredibly accurate. He also claims that collaboration between "data scientists, development experts, governments, civil society, and the private sector" is a step towards overcoming international development issues.

As the foundation for Blumenstock's thesis, I believe humbler data science could transform international development. Regarding Anna Raymond's idea of "good intent," I believe it is an essential part of solving these issues, but it isn't enough to determine people's experiences. Transparency is essential because of the complexity of these data and human development issues. I agree with Nira Nair that transparency should increase for humbler data science. 

With the intersection of human development and data science, I believe all three ideas of "good intent," "transparency," and "balancing act" are important to approach international development issues with good intent in a transparent way, to balance applications without hindering others.
