[Back to Home Page](https://grace-yoon1.github.io/DATA150/)

Grace Yoon

COLL 150 Human Development and Data Science

Professor Brewer

24 October 2021

Word count: 2545

---

### Literature Review: Poverty Assessment and Analysis in India

---

#### Introduction to Solving the Poverty Crisis in India through Geospatial and Satellite Data

Poverty is a significant harm to countries all over the world. It causes millions of humans to face challenges like poor health and untenable living conditions. They are unable to fulfill their basic needs and capabilities to survive due to the lack of resources, goods, and services (Fashridjal). To reduce the amount of poverty in the world, researchers have tried numerous approaches, however, the issue is not knowing exactly where in these countries that individuals suffer from poverty the most. Without knowing these areas of poverty, development in these countries is slowed down, not allowing them to attain the freedoms to allow them to thrive. To find specific areas of poverty, data science methods using geospatial and satellite data can be used to spatially target and estimate poverty in these underdeveloped countries (Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, World). 

In Amartya Sen’s “Development as Freedom,” Sen discusses how analyzing and assessing poverty can enhance the lives we lead and the freedoms we enjoy (Sen). Gathering data to find areas that are not as developed can allow us to use freedoms to further develop and remove the unfreedom of low income (Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, World). Sen discusses how development is the process of expanding human freedoms and by obtaining information about these poorer areas, actions and policies can be made to allow these countries to reach this developmental freedom. The process of development, when judged by the enhancement of human freedom, has to include the removal of an individual’s deprivation such as poverty. Living a long and healthy life by having access to knowledge and a decent standard of living is what allows a country to flourish and alleviate poverty (Sen). In this literature review, I will assess geospatial data science methods that can be utilized to assess poverty and how they can be analyzed to alleviate poverty in a developing country: India.

---

#### Poverty from a Global Perspective

Poverty is the scarcity of necessary resources in order to fulfill needs and capabilities. Lack of food, shelter, and clothing contributes to issues of healthcare, security, and education (Das). Unsurprisingly, poverty is in areas with larger populations that lack enough resources to gain financial security. While there have been attempts to diminish poverty on a global scale, most have been unsuccessful in these underdeveloped areas (Fashridjal). To further grow and sustain the globe, it is important to eradicate poverty. Alleviating poverty is the United Nation’s number one goal for developing countries. To achieve this solution, an exact poverty map is needed. In the developing world, there is a barrier to this goal due to unreliable and ineffective data collection. However, there is an alternative approach: mapping poverty using high-resolution satellite imagery along with survey data (Das). 

The Progress out of Poverty Index (PPI) can be used to create poverty maps that display the chance of individuals living in poverty for large geographic areas, such as those in India. Finding ways to quantify and predict poverty is complex in large areas of population. To attempt to circumvent this issue, PPI uses geolocated survey data and geospatial datasets to predict spatial poverty, which can be used to better understand where these areas are in order to further develop them (Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, World). 

Data is essential to understanding a population’s situation to make the best informed decision in “resource allocation, poverty alleviation programs, and policies” (Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. “High). Geospatial datasets and patterns of poverty have been built from census data, however, those datasets have been inaccurate due to irregular or unavailable data in these low-income areas (Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. “High). Therefore, powerful machine learning techniques like poverty mapping allow us to understand complex human development problems from accurate data and reach the sustainable goal of locating areas in need, providing them freedoms in order to develop as a whole (Das).

---

#### Why India?

I chose India because it is a large country by both population and size, it is made up mostly of rural areas, and it suffers from high levels of poverty. In undeveloped countries like India, the people suffer complex challenges such as no access to health care, safe drinking water, and adequate food. Millions of people in India live on less than $1.90 per day with an unreliable income source, which is not enough to experience human freedoms from development and growth. It is challenging to map poverty in countries with large populations over a large area of land, making India an interesting case study as a country with these attributes. Surveys and other non data science poverty predicting methods wouldn’t be as effective for large developing countries, which is why I chose to explore geospatial data science methods to assess and analyze poverty in India. 

India is the second most populous country in the world with 21.9% of 1.34 billion people suffering from poverty (Das). People don’t have access to basic health care, food, water, and clean living situations due to “centralized development” and “inequitable distribution of income” (Satapathy). Even though India is the fastest growing economy and its GDP grew from $93.7 billion in 1950 to $2.65 trillion in 2017, it still faces poverty and it has remained an issue throughout the years. A major reason India still faces widespread poverty is due to a discrepancy in the amount of infrastructure that has been developed in different areas of the country (Satapathy). Traditional methods of collecting data in these underdeveloped areas are ineffective and inaccurate because of widespread poverty and issues like communication. Using high and medium resolution satellite imagery data to predict poverty in a region at a large scale is a much faster and accurate approach than traditional methods (Das). 

To measure poverty in India, some have used methodologies of estimation based on calories intake, income, and score-based ranking, among other traditional socioeconomic factors. For estimating poverty based on calories intake, the number of calories required for a person to be in a good health condition is compared with how much a person spends on calories, dividing a population from poor and non poor. Another traditional method is estimating based on income, where the poverty line has a fixed level of income that fulfills basic needs. The method of score-based ranking estimation observes the person’s quality of life based on factors of income, food, occupation, education, etc. For the current state of poverty in India, 1 in every 5 Indians are considered poor and 80% of them live in rural areas (Satapathy). Poverty is a major problem in developing countries, especially in India, but the efforts of using data science methods can help alleviate this issue.

---

#### Combining Satellite Imagery and Machine Learning to Analyze Poverty

Reliable data is scarce in undeveloped countries, so methods like using high-resolution satellite imagery can be used to attain accurate data. A convolutional neural network (CNN) is a model that can be used to identify and analyze variation patterns in these images. Using a CNN is critical for obtaining accurate measurements of poverty to make decisions about providing resources to areas that need it. Over the years, data in developing countries have improved, but it is still lacking, making it difficult to identify and analyze target populations in need. Traditional data collection methods like surveys to close these data gaps are expensive and difficult. Instead, sources of passively collected data from satellites can be a better option. A popular approach is using satellite images of nightlights to estimate poverty (Jean). In impoverished countries, luminosity levels are lower because there is less infrastructure in those rural areas, while big cities are “bathed in light at night” and have a higher standard of living because they are generally more developed (Elvidge). Elvidge, and several other researchers, have developed a measurement of human development called “Night Light Development Index (NLDI)” by using nighttime satellite images and population density from gridded population data (Elvidge). In their study, they have found an interesting pattern from NLDI. The data points for extremely poor countries are pressed along the population count and have no spread on the brightness axis. In more developed countries with smaller populations, the data cloud is in a circular shape pressed against both the population count and the brightness of the lights in satellite images. Extracting and comparing patterns from data plots like these can determine the development level of countries (Elvidge). High-resolution satellite imagery is very effective because of how accessible and useful it is in producing predictions of economic activity. By training a CNN on ImageNet, it can learn how to classify 1000 different objects. With the CNN, it can pick up other features in the satellite images such as bodies of water, roads, etc. Overall, this powerful machine learning approach of extracting data from nighttime satellite images and comparing the data points on scattergrams is a very effective approach to predicting poverty (Jean).

---

#### The Research/Data Science Methods

There are several data science methods that I have found to be significant and interesting in assessing and analyzing poverty in areas like India. To predict and understand poverty on a geographic level, neural networks can be used in conjunction with geospatial datasets to produce accurate assessments for even the most rural areas. Identifying these impoverished areas is difficult which causes these populations to lack “money, food, medicine, and access to education” (Kumar). There are many resources being produced for billions of people, yet due to the difficulty of understanding and identifying these countries, many still suffer in poverty. To alleviate poverty, data science strategies like creating computer vision models allow us to provide resources and predict poverty in countries. The article, “How to Understand Global Poverty from Outer Space,” discusses five key steps to approaching global poverty (Kumar). The author discusses a method to predict poverty using a convolutional neural network and uses daytime and nighttime satellite images to analyze certain areas in order to improve policy initiatives and alleviate poverty. The first step is to download Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS), nightlight satellite imagery, and daytime satellite imagery. The article discusses downloading data and constructing clusters to gain a better understanding and measurement for “health, population, and nutrition” (Kumar). They used the Google Maps Platform to obtain daytime images that have features of landscape and activity. Then, the next step is to test whether nightlights can predict wealth accurately. From the data collected, the DHS and nightlights data is merged to see if nightlights data can be used for predicting poverty. The author explains how creating this visualization that highlights certain areas of the satellite imagery shows that nightlight luminosity is a strong predictor of wealth. After, extracted features of the daytime imagery are tested to see if they can also predict wealth accurately. Daytime imagery can be a valuable tool as well and when merged with the DHS data, “a model of wealth as a function of these basic daytime features [can be] fitted” (Kumar). Next, a convolutional neural network is constructed to leverage a combined dataset of daytime and nighttime images. A transfer learning approach using a convolutional neural network estimates nightlight intensities, repurposes the model, and obtains final feature vectors. Lastly, maps are constructed to show the predicted distributions of wealth. In conclusion, an approach to predict poverty in areas is to use convolutional neural networks with daytime and nighttime satellite imagery with survey data. Analyzing the data from this is scalable and inexpensive, hence why the author plans to expand this for more countries (Kumar). This article relates to Amartya Sen’s definition of human development the author discusses how using data science can lead a population towards freedom. From using convolutional neural networks and satellite imagery, more information can be obtained to understand those suffering from the unfreedom of poverty. With a greater understanding of these areas, it becomes far more feasible to help these individuals deprived of basic capabilities out of poverty and expand their ability to live freely (Sen).

The article, “How Data Science Can Give Further Understanding on Urban Poverty,” discusses three phases of analysis to understand the needs of the poor from data (Fashridjal). I find these phases of analysis to be an effective approach to understanding development problems in countries. The first phase of analysis is how data science can be utilized to formulate datasets on development problems in countries and match with already existing datasets from the Geographic Information System (GIS) to grasp a deeper understanding of utility in these areas. Then, in the second phase, community leaders can be contacted to delve deeper into these areas and attain specific data from those residents. The data points could be used to analyze development issues such as current living conditions, education infrastructure, and employment to predict the stability of employment for young residents in these areas. In the third phase of analysis, experimentation and data can be used to gain information on how to fulfill the needs of the population. By experimenting on two similar areas, such as offering one area upgrades to their current settlement compared to the other relocating to a new neighborhood, it is possible to assess and see which case would fulfill the needs of those in poverty better. The data in experiments could also be used for future initiatives in developing problems to predict their outputs. Overall, insights on areas living in poverty can be attained from data science in order to apply the right alleviation strategies that are needed (Fashridjal).

Lastly, another method I find significant is high-resolution poverty mapping from cell phone and satellite data. Data collected from mobile phone operators allows accurate and updated high-resolution maps to be produced. With these high-resolution maps, poverty in these areas can be accessed closely and efficiently. From satellite imagery and mobile operators, human living conditions and behavior can be observed in these populations, like India and other South Asia countries. For example, the article, “High Resolution Poverty Mapping from Cell Phone and Satellite Data,” provides a figure of a prediction map in Bangladesh using mobile phone operators and other data to closely access areas in poverty (Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. “High). The wealth index is color-coded, having areas in red shown as poorer areas. The figure has a closer view of the capital of Bangladesh, Dhaka. From these models, the spatial relationships in the data of these areas can be used to understand and update these maps, which is important for analyzing poorer areas to alleviate poverty (Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. “High).

---

#### Conclusion

Methods to alleviate poverty around the world are described in all of the articles I’ve researched. From using traditional methods such as data collection from surveys to utilizing technology, such as CNNs, to explore data, there is one common objective: to eliminate poverty. I’ve learned that this can be achieved through observing poverty maps from satellite imagery data. Satellite data can be used to obtain information and create spatial datasets for poverty status in developing countries. It is important to use this effective approach frequently to track poverty accurately over time and provide the necessary resources in areas that need it, in order to live a life with basic capabilities, freedoms, and opportunities. There is a gap in the literature that I would like to address. All of the articles studied zoomed out satellite images of vast areas of land to predict and assess poverty in a country. I would like to know if the same approach could be applied with taking satellite imagery at neighborhood levels to estimate poverty. I am interested in exploring more from the analysis and research I’ve done in poverty in developing countries like India. My central research question is: Can poverty be mapped and estimated accurately from satellite imagery at a closer neighborhood-level resolution to obtain more refined and precise predictions?

---

#### Citations

Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. “High Resolution Poverty Mapping from Cell Phone and Satellite Data.” WorldPop, https://www.worldpop.org/portfolio/project?id=23. Accessed 2 Oct. 2021. 

Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, World Bank, Grameen Foundation. “High Resolution Progress out of Poverty Mapping.” WorldPop, https://www.worldpop.org/portfolio/project?id=22. Accessed 30 Sept. 2021.

Das, Partha Sarathi, et al. “Socio Economic Analysis of India with High Resolution Satellite Imagery to Predict Poverty.” 2020 10th International Conference on Cloud Computing, Data Science & Engineering (Confluence), 9 Apr. 2020, pp. 310–314., https://doi.org/10.1109/Confluence47617.2020.9057972. Accessed 23 Oct. 2021.

Elvidge, C. D., et al. “The Night Light Development Index (NLDI): a Spatially Explicit Measure of Human Development from Satellite Data.” Social Geography, 23 July 2012, Accessed 23 Oct. 2021.

Fashridjal, Freddy. “How Data Science Can Give Further Understanding on Urban Poverty.” Towards Data Science, 13AD, https://towardsdatascience.com/how-data-science-can-give-further-understanding-on-urban-poverty-ab52e448913.

Jean, Neal, et al. “Combining Satellite Imagery and Machine Learning to Predict Poverty.” American Association for the Advancement of Science, vol. 353, no. 6301, Aug. 2016, pp. 790–794., https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaf7894. Accessed 23 Oct. 2021.

Kumar, Asmi. “How to Understand Global Poverty from Outer Space.” Towards Data Science, 5 July 2020, https://towardsdatascience.com/how-to-understand-global-poverty-from-outer-space-442e2a5c3666. 

Satapathy, Swastik S, and Krishna K Jaiswal. “A Study on Poverty Estimation and Current State of Poverty in India.” International Journal of Advanced Scientific Research and Management, vol. 3, no. 6, June 2018, Accessed 23 Oct. 2021. 

Sen, A. K. (2010). Development as freedom. Oxford University Press.


